docs/kola: adding instructions to using and testing kola (#2738)
coreos/coreos-assembler: docs/kola.md

---

# Testing with Kola

> 

Reviewer: Remove the extra line added here

- pattern: test2.test
  ...
```

> 

Reviewer: Same here, remove the extra line added here.

Author: Thanks renata, finished that there, should be good to go!

kolet is run on kola instances to run native functions in tests. Generally kolet
is not invoked manually.

## More information on tests

> After you run the kola test, you can find more information in tmp/kola/<test-name> about the test that just ran, as the following file logs . They will help you to debug the problem and will certainly give you hints along the way

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
After you run the kola test, you can find more information in `tmp/kola/<test-name>` about the test that just ran, as the following file logs. They will help you to debug the problem and will certainly give you hints along the way.
```

minor fixups

1. `journal.txt`
2. `console.txt`
3. `ignition.json`

> 4. `gunzip journal-raw.txt.gz`

Reviewer: ```suggestion
4. `journal-raw.txt.gz`
```

## Extended artifacts

1. Extended artifacts need additional forms of testing (You can pass the ignition and the path to the artifact you want to test)
2. `cosa kola run -h` (this allows you to see the commands yourself and what syntax is needed)

> 3. `cosa buildextend-"name_of_artifact` (An example of building an artifact before testing it)

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
3. `cosa buildextend-"name_of_artifact"` (An example of building an extended artifact)
```

4. `kola run -p <platform>` Is the most generic way of testing extended artifacts, this is mostly useful for the cloud platforms
5. For running the likes of metal/metal4k artifacts there's not much difference than running `kola run` from the coreos-assembler
6. `cd builds/latest/` (This will show your latest build information)
7. `cosa list` (This will show you the most recent CoreOS builds that have been made and the artifacts that were created)
8. In the case of the `testiso` command, you'll see that there is the `--qemu-native-4k` option passed to `kola testiso`.  This instructs the `testiso` test to attempt to install FCOS/RHCOS to a disk that uses 4k sector size.  If you don't include that option, the `testiso` command will attempt to install FCOS/RHCOS to a non 4k disk (512b sector size)
9. `kola testiso -S --scenarios pxe-install,pxe-offline-install --output-dir tmp/kola-metal`   You can also pass some scenarios, in case you do not want to run all of them

> 10. `cosa kola testiso --qemu-native-4k` (This is an example of me testing the live ISO build for a 4k sectors disk, this tests all of the scenarios)

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
10. `cosa kola testiso --qemu-native-4k` (This is an example testing the live ISO build for a 4k sectors disk. This tests all of the scenarios.)
```

Example output:

```
kola -p qemu-unpriv --output-dir tmp/kola testiso -P --qemu-native-4k
Testing scenarios: [iso-offline-install iso-live-login iso-as-disk miniso-install miniso-install-nm]
Detected development build; disabling signature verification
Successfully tested scenario iso-offline-install for 35.20220217.dev.0 on uefi (metal4k)
Successfully tested scenario iso-live-login for 35.20220217.dev.0 on uefi (metal4k)
Successfully tested scenario iso-as-disk for 35.20220217.dev.0 on uefi (metal4k)
Successfully tested scenario miniso-install for 35.20220217.dev.0 on uefi (metal4k)
Successfully tested scenario miniso-install-nm for 35.20220217.dev.0 on uefi (metal4k with NM keyfile)
```

## Useful commands

`cosa kola run 'name_of_test'` This is how to run a single test, This is used to help debug specific tests in order to get a better understanding of the bug that's taking place. Once you run this command this test will be added to the tmp directory

> `cosa kola basic` This will just run the basic tests

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
`cosa kola run basic` This will just run the basic tests
```

> `cosa kola --parallel` This will by default run 3 tests in a row

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
`cosa kola run --parallel=3` This will run tests in parallel, 3 at a time.
```

Author: Thanks Dusty, will rebase now!

Reviewer 2: This looks like it still needs implementing.

Author: thats weird I thought I did, will try again
